So I have multiple of these spheres.
And so all I'm doing is I'm wrapping
the code that we've written so
far into a for loop.
I'm just repeating it and placing
these spheres in different positions.
I mean everything goes within the for
loop except we don't put the geometry
stuff inside the for loop.
Because it's good to just
have a single geometry and
reuse that across many meshes.
But you can reuse a material, but
you don't need to reuse a material because
if you specify 100 materials, and
they're all using the same shader, three
js is gonna know to combine those under
the hood into the same sort of GPU thing.
But if you specify 100 geometries, it's
not going to be able to combine those and
so it's going to end up running slowly.
And so yeah, this is just getting
multiple spheres and using reso colors,
changing the colors of the sphere
based on some randomness, so
sometimes I'm going to say a uniform color
for the the fill color of the sphere.
But then also there's another
uniform color for the point color.
And so instead of always mixing it and
going from color to white,
it's going from color A to color B.
And here, it's introducing rim lighting.
And so
if you want to introduce rim lighting,
there's actually a snippet
in the repo that you
can pretty much just copy
paste into your frag shader.
So here's just a little reminder
about GLSL in three js.
And then we finally get
into the rim light shader.
So rim lighting is like a backlighting
almost, so we can copy and
paste this chunk.
We can paste it into our fragment
shader above the void main because all
the functions go outside non one of
the functions go within functions.
And then we can use it just
like in this example here.
And we can use this to create
some sort of fake lighting.
where maybe we'll use the frag color and
we'll increase the frag
color based on some rim amount, but maybe
not so drastically, we'll scale it down.
So that's how I'm creating
this rim light effect.
You can see this function
here how it works,
it's not the most efficient
way of doing this.
One of the things that
you'll start to find is
this might start to slow
down if you have tons and
tons of geometries or tons and
tons of meshes going with the same shader.
And there's a couple reasons for that.
One is this chunk here is
actually not very efficient.
We've done this because it allows
us to understand things like,
how to get an array into a shader and
how to use defines.
But it's not a very efficient way of doing
this because every single pixel in this
sphere has to loop over
every single point.
And so a more efficient approach,
which we're not gonna try and
get into now because
it's quite advanced but
just to tell you a more efficient approach
and you can see it in the source.
For those that are really curious.
Inside source, inside demos,
there's this kusama-sphere-advanced.
And what this is gonna do, instead of
always looking across every single
point to find the nearest point it's going
to store the nearest three points for
each face in this sphere.
And so
then in the shader it just needs to say,
I'm going to go through
the nearest three points.
Because this point here, for
example, never needs to compare
itself with this point way over here.
Because it's always gonna just be
within the points nearest to it,
within the three or
maybe four points nearest to it.
So that's how this advanced
approach is working.
It runs much faster,
you can get hundreds or
potentially thousands of
spheres with this approach.
They can all be spinning and
moving in real-time, but if you try and
do that with this code, it's gonna
start to slow down a little bit.
Another thing that might be
slowing down your code here
is that generally when we do things
like lighting and rim lighting,
a lot of this computation can be
moved upwards to the vertex shader.
And so there's this concept
in graphics programming is,
if you're running things
in your fragment shader,
a lot of times you can just move this
data up into your vertex shader.
Do the same math same computation
in your vertex shader and
then pass the information
down to your fragment shader.
And because of the way that
OpenGL works it will interpolate
all the information across
the triangles and across the vertices.
And so you can sometimes lift that up and
move the,
the complex math into the vertex shader,
and then just pass the value down.
That's a very common way of
optimizing your fragment shaders.
And so here we have finally,
pretty much kind of the end result.
There's a few other things
that I could mention.
I'll mention a few other things,
[LAUGH] but does anyone have questions?
Yeah.
>> So you mentioned the pipelines,
is that how the pipelines always work,
they go from vertex shader
to fragment shader?
>> Yeah, so this pipeline this idea of
the pipeline it exists like this on pretty
much every GPU and graphics processing
library, like whether it's in unity or
whether it's in unreal engine or something
else, but it's always under the hood.
It's always working the same
way where some vertex data, so
that might be buffed like,
for example, in three js.
It's called a buffer geometry.
But really a buffer geometry is just
a set of arrays that have X, Y,
Z values for each vertex and
it stores other data.
It stores things like position.
Stores things like UV coordinates,
or normals, or maybe the colors for
each vertex.
And that information that's
stored inside of the geometry
gets passed into a vertex shader.
And then the vertex shader
takes those attributes and
it turns those attributes into a screen
space position here, which is this line.
But it also can do other things.
It can pass down the information
down this waterfall, and
this is what we've been doing here.
We're taking the attributes and we're
taking the information that we have in our
vertex shader and passing it
downwards to our fragment shader.
And then the fragment shaders
receiving those as varyings and
it's using those in
the the fragment shader.
And one of the things that isn't
immediately obvious, but if you have,
let's say, an OpenGL triangle,
this is like the Hello World of OpenGL.
So here,
this triangle is made up of three vertices
and each vertex has a different
colour associated with it.
So this vertex here it
has a defined position,
but it also has a defined
color which is green.
This vertex is red, and
this vertex is blue.
And when we render this, maybe the vertex
shader is gonna look like this.
So I'm just gonna write this real quick.
Just to show you.
So maybe the vertex shader is going
to have attribute vec3 color,
attribute vec3 position.
And now in three js we don't need to
write these things manually because
three js comes built in with color
position UV and some other things.
But if we were doing manual stuff or if
we were including our own attributes that
are not built into three js, we'd have
to actually write attribute vec3 color.
So we extract the vertex data and
then we're going to pass it down,
varying vec3 vColor.
So v is just like a Common way of saying
this is a varying, so vColor = color.
And now what we're doing is we're passing
it down to the fragment shader, and
the fragment shader is gonna
interpolate automatically between
the values we get from these vertices.
So although we've only passed down red and
we've only passed down green and
we've only passed down blue.
The fragment shader is going to
say okay for this pixel here,
I'm going to figure out
the value of the color.
I'm going to figure that value out
based on how far I am in the triangle
towards this vertex or towards this
vertex or towards this vertex.
So the pixels that are here, they're
almost entirely the same as this vertex.
So these pixels are going to be very,
very red.
The pixels here are going to be very blue,
but as we go into the center it’s going to
sort of mix these three colors together
into some sort of other color.
And so that’s another thing that’s
kind of happening within the pipeline.
And all of this is pretty much
happening in every graphics library,
every graphics rendering engine.
There's some differences here and there,
but ultimately it's the same concept.
And once it goes through
the fragment shader,
then it goes through a final step which
basically takes these rastri triangles and
puts it onto our screen and applies some
other stuff like clipping depending on
things like where it
appears in the screen.
And things like that, but it's ultimately,
it's almost the final step.